Sync up6 branch with master (#7040)
ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website: swan-lake/learn-the-platform/ballerina-persist/supported-data-stores.md

---
layout: ballerina-persist-documentation-left-nav-pages-swanlake

> title: Supported Data Stores

Author: ```suggestion
title: Supported Data Stores
```
All titles should be in sentence case.

> title: Supported Data Stores

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Supported data stores
```

> description: The sections gives details on the Supported Data Stores.

Author: ```suggestion
description: The sections give details on the Supported Data Stores.
```
Same as above.

keywords: ballerina, programming language, ballerina packages, persist, data store, in-memory, mysql, google sheets
permalink: /learn/ballerina-persist/supported-datastores/
active: persist_supported_datastores

> intro: In the realm of `bal persist` feature, selecting the right data store is crucial for ensuring the reliable storage and retrieval of data. Various data stores exist, each with its strengths and weaknesses. The `bal persist` currently supports three data stores. Depending on the data store you selected for your application, configuration and supported types are varied.

Author: ```suggestion
intro: In the realm of `bal persist` feature, selecting the right data store is crucial for ensuring the reliable storage and retrieval of data. Various data stores exist, each with its strengths and weaknesses. The `bal persist` currently supports three data stores. Depending on the data store you selected for your application, configuration and supported types are varied.
```
Same as above.

redirect_from:
- /learn/ballerina-persist/supported-datastores/
---

> Following are the data stores supported,

Author: ```suggestion
Following are the supported data stores.
```

> * In-Memory

Author: ```suggestion
* In-memory
```

* MySQL
* Google Sheets [Experimental]

> The datastore is passed as a parameter to the `persist init` command. If you do not specify a data store, the In-Memory data store is used by default. 

Author: ```suggestion
The data store is passed as a parameter to the `persist init` command. If you do not specify a data store, the in-memory data store is used by default. 
```

```shell
$ bal persist init --datastore mysql
```

> It is recorded in the `Ballerina.toml` file in your project as follows:

Author: ```suggestion
It is recorded in the `Ballerina.toml` file in your project as follows.
```

```toml
[persist]
datastore = mysql
...
```

> The following sections describe the configuration and supported types for each data store.

Author: ```suggestion
The following sections describe the configurations and supported types for each data store.
```

> ## In-Memory

Author: ```suggestion
## In-memory
```

> The In-Memory data store is a simple data store that stores data in memory. This data store is useful for testing purposes. The In-Memory data store is the default data store for `bal persist`. Therefore, you do not need to explicitly specify the data store when you are using the In-Memory data store.

Author: ```suggestion
The `in-memory` data store is a simple data store that stores data in memory. This data store is useful for testing purposes. It is the default data store for `bal persist`. Therefore, you do not need to explicitly specify the data store when you are using it.
```

### Supported Ballerina Types

> The In-Memory data store supports the following Ballerina types:

Author: ```suggestion
The `in-memory` data store supports the following Ballerina types.
```

> * [any](https://ballerina.io/learn/language-basics/#any-type)

Author: ```suggestion
* [`any`](https://ballerina.io/learn/language-basics/#any-type)
```

> * error

Author: ```suggestion
* `error`
```

### Configuration

The In-Memory data store does not require any configuration. 

## MySQL

> The MySQL data store is a relational database management system that stores data in tables. The MySQL data store is useful for storing data in a relational format. The MySQL data store is not the default data store for `bal persist`. Therefore, you need to explicitly specify the data store when initializing `bal persist` in your application. like below,

Author: ```suggestion
The MySQL data store is a relational database management system that stores data in tables. It is useful for storing data in a relational format. It is not the default data store for `bal persist`. Therefore, you need to explicitly specify the data store when initializing `bal persist` in your application as follows.
```

```shell
$ bal persist init --datastore mysql
```

### Supported Ballerina Types

The following table lists the Ballerina types supported by the MySQL data store and the corresponding SQL types used to store the data in the database.

> |  Ballerina Type  |    SQL Type     |

Author: ```suggestion
|  Ballerina type  |    SQL type     |
```

|:----------------:|:---------------:|

> |       int        |       INT       |

Author: ```suggestion
|       int        |       INT       |
```
Shall we add backticks to all these values in both columns?

Reviewer: No need.

|      float       |     DOUBLE      |
|     decimal      | DECIMAL(65,30)  |
|      string      |  VARCHAR(191)   |
|     boolean      |     BOOLEAN     |
|      byte[]      |    LONGBLOB     |
|        ()        |      NULL       |
|    time:Date     |      DATE       |
|  time:TimeOfDay  |      TIME       |
|     time:Utc     |    TIMESTAMP    |
|    time:Civil    |    DATETIME     |

 

> If you want to map a Ballerina type to a different SQL type or want to change the default length of a SQL type, you can change it in the `script.sql` file generated by the `persist generate` command before executing the script.

Author: ```suggestion
If you want to map a Ballerina type to a different SQL type or want to change the default length of an SQL type, you can change it in the `script.sql` file generated by the `persist generate` command before executing the script.
```

### Configuration

You need to set values for the following basic configuration parameters in the `Config.toml` file in your project to use the MySQL data store.

|  Parameter  |              Description              |
|:-----------:|:-------------------------------------:|

> |    host     |   The hostname of the MySQL server.   |

Author: ```suggestion
|    host     |   The hostname of the MySQL server.   |
```
Shall we add the parameter names within backticks?

|    port     |     The port of the MySQL server.     |
|  username   |   The username of the MySQL server.   |
|  password   |   The password of the MySQL server.   |
|  database   | The name of the database to be used.  |

> The following is a sample `Config.toml` file with the MySQL data store configuration. This is generated by the `persist generate` command.

Author: ```suggestion
The following is a sample `Config.toml` file with the MySQL data store configurations. This is generated by the `persist generate` command.
```

```toml
[<packageName>.<moduleName>]
host = "localhost"
port = 3306
user = "root"
password = ""
database = ""
```

> Additionally, you can set values for the following advanced configuration parameters in the `Config.toml` file in your project to use the MySQL data store. Please refer to the [MySQL Connector documentation](https://lib.ballerina.io/ballerinax/mysql/1.8.0#Options) for more information on these parameters.

Author: ```suggestion
Additionally, you can set values for the following advanced configuration parameters in the `Config.toml` file in your project to use the MySQL data store. Please refer to the [MySQL Connector documentation](https://lib.ballerina.io/ballerinax/mysql/1.8.0#Options) for more information on these parameters.
```
Fix the hyperlink format as per the guidelines.

### How to Set up

#### Set up a MySQL server instance

Select one of the methods below to set up a MySQL server.

> Tip: Keep the connection and authentication details for connecting to the MySQL server including the hostname, port, username and password noted down.

Author: ```suggestion
>**Tip:** Note the connection and authentication details for connecting to the MySQL server including the hostname, port, username, and password to be used later.
```

> * Install a MySQL server on your machine locally by downloading and installing MySQL for different platforms.

Author: ```suggestion
* Install a MySQL server on your machine locally by downloading and installing MySQL for different platforms.
```
Shall we add the external links?

> * Use a cross-platform web-server solution such as XAMPP or WampServer.

Author: ```suggestion
* Use a cross-platform web-server solution such as XAMPP or WampServer.
```
Shall we add the external links?

> * Use Docker to create a MySQL server deployment.

Author: ```suggestion
* Use Docker to create a MySQL server deployment.
```
Shall we add the external links?

> * Use a cloud-based MySQL solution such as Google’s CloudSQL, Amazon’s RDS for MySQL, or Microsoft’s Azure database for MySQL.

Author: ```suggestion
* Use a cloud-based MySQL solution such as Google’s CloudSQL, Amazon’s RDS for MySQL, or Microsoft’s Azure database for MySQL.
```
Shall we add the external links?

#### Run the script to create the database and tables

> The `persist generate` command generates a `script.sql` file in the generated directory of your project. This file contains the SQL script to create the tables required for your application. You need to run this script to create the database and tables in the MySQL server using a MySQL client such as MySQL Workbench or the MySQL command line client.

Author: ```suggestion
The `persist generate` command generates a `script.sql` file in the generated directory of your project. This file contains the SQL script to create the tables required for your application. You need to run this script to create the database and tables in the MySQL server using a MySQL client such as MySQL Workbench or the MySQL command line client.
```
Shall we add the external links?

## Google Sheets

The Google Sheets data store is a cloud-based spreadsheet application that stores data in tables. The Google Sheets data store is useful for storing data in a spreadsheet format. The Google Sheets data store is not the default data store for `bal persist`. Therefore, you need to explicitly specify the data store when initializing `bal persist` in your application. like below,

```shell
$ bal persist init --datastore googlesheets
```

### Supported Ballerina Types

The following table lists the Ballerina types supported by the Google Sheets data store and the corresponding Google Sheets types used to store the data in the spreadsheet.

> |  Ballerina Type  | Google Sheets Type  |

Author: ```suggestion
|  Ballerina Type  | Google Sheets Type  |
```
Same as above.

|:----------------:|:-------------------:|
|       int        |       NUMBER        |
|      float       |       NUMBER        |
|     decimal      |       NUMBER        |
|      string      |       STRING        |
|     boolean      |       BOOLEAN       |
|    time:Date     |       STRING        |
|  time:TimeOfDay  |       STRING        |
|     time:Utc     |       STRING        |
|    time:Civil    |       STRING        |

### Configuration

You need to set values for the following basic configuration parameters in the `Config.toml` file in your project to use the Google Sheets data store.

> |   Parameter    |                 Description                  |

Author: ```suggestion
|   Parameter    |                 Description                  |
```
Add backticks to the parameter names.

|:--------------:|:--------------------------------------------:|
|    clientId    |   The client ID of the Google Sheets API.    |
|  clientSecret  | The client secret of the Google Sheets API.  |
|  refreshToken  | The refresh token of the Google Sheets API.  |
| spreadsheetId  |    The ID of the spreadsheet to be used.     |

The following is a sample `Config.toml` file with the Google Sheets data store configuration. This is generated by the `persist generate` command.

```toml
[<packageName>.<moduleName>]
spreadsheetId = ""
clientId = ""
clientSecret = ""
refreshToken = ""
```

Please refer to the [Google API documentation](https://developers.google.com/identity/protocols/oauth2) for more information on how to obtain the client ID, client secret, and refresh token.

### How to Set up

#### How to run `script.gs` in the worksheet

The `script.gs` file generated from the `persist generate` command can initiate the google sheets client. This file can be executed in the Google Apps Script console using the following steps.
1. Go to the respective spreadsheet.

> 2. Open the AppScript console from the menu item `Extensions - > Apps Script`

Author: ```suggestion
2. Open the AppScript console from the menu item `Extensions - > Apps Script`.
```
Give the instructions as a sequence of clicking.

> 3. Copy the content of the script.gs file into the console.

Author: ```suggestion
3. Copy the content of the `script.gs` file into the console.
```

> 4. Click the Deploy button to Deploy the project as a Web Application.

Author: ```suggestion
4. Click **Deploy** to deploy the project as a web application.
```

> 5. Click on the Run button to execute the selected function.

Author: ```suggestion
5. Click **Run** to execute the selected function.
```

#### How to obtain Google API tokens

> API tokens for the Google sheets can be obtained using the following procedure.

Author: ```suggestion
Follow the steps below to obtain API tokens for Google Sheets.
```

> 1. Get the clientID, and ClientSecret using the code following [guidelines](https://developers.google.com/identity/protocols/oauth2).

Author: ```suggestion
1. Get the `clientID` and `ClientSecret` by following the [guidelines](https://developers.google.com/identity/protocols/oauth2).
```

> 2. Please note that you have to add https://developers.google.com/oauthplayground if you want to use OAuth 2.0 playground to receive the authorization code and obtain the access token and refresh token). The steps are as follows,

Author: ```suggestion
2. Follow the steps below to add https://developers.google.com/oauthplayground if you want to use OAuth 2.0 playground to receive the authorization code, access token, and refresh token.
```

>     1. Go to the OAuth 2.0 playground and open the settings menu on the top right side. 

Author: ```suggestion
    1. Go to the OAuth 2.0 playground and click **Settings** on the top right-hand side. 
```

>     2. Tick `Use your own OAuth credentials` & provide the `Client ID` & `Client Secret` obtained. 

Author: ```suggestion
    2. Select **Use your own OAuth credentials** and provide the client ID and client secret obtained. 
```

>     3. As step 1 under the  `Select & authorize APIs` section, select the required scopes for the API you are going to use. 

Author: ```suggestion
    3. For step 1 under the  `Select & authorize APIs` section, select the required scopes for the API you are going to use. 
```

    4. Proceed with the necessary Google account validation steps. 

>     5. You will obtain the Authorization code. Click `Exchange authorization code for tokens` to obtain the `Refresh token` & `Access token`.

Author: ```suggestion
    5. Click **Exchange authorization code for tokens** to obtain the refresh and access tokens.
```
